346 DE RERUM UNIVERSITATIBUS. [111. §§ 77-81.

system of manus injecti0‚ the judgment debtor (judicatus), after the
expiration of the thirty dies justi, was no longer allowed to defend
an action in person, but might, as we see by the above-quoted
fragment of the Twelve Tables, be defended by a vindex, In the
formulary system, the equivalent of the vindex was satisdatio judi-
catum solvi, security with two sureties for the payment of the
judgment to be recovered, and the judgment recoverable in an actio
judicati was for twice the amount of the disputed judgment debt,
Gaiae, 4 ᾧ 9, 4 ᾧ 102. Supposing, however, the missio in posses·
sionem was not founded on a previous judgment, but on the debtor's
absconding or keeping house, then the period at which he was dis-
abled from defending an action, unless he gave security (judicatum
solvi), was the expiration of thirty days after his estate had been
seized and advertised for sale, Cicero, Pro Flacco.

(2) After the possession and proscription of the estate for thirty
days, a second decree of the praetor empowered the creditore to
hold a meeting and elect a magister to manage the sale, correspond-
ing to the creditor's assignee or, at the present day, the creditor's
trustee of English law.

(3) After a certain period, a third decree authorized the publica-
tion of the conditione of sale, which were appended to the original
advertisement.

After another period, com pleting, in all probability, sixty days
from the first missio in possessionem, the sale took place by public
auction, the universitas juris of the debtor being transferred to the
bidder who offered the creditore the highest dividend, that is, the
greatest amount in the pound on their respective claims.

The periods prescribed for these successive stages of the proceed-
ings are not decipherable in the manuscript of Gaius. In the ‘trans-
lation they are assumed, in the case of a deceased bankrupt‚ to have
been half the periods prescribed in the case of a living debtor.

The principal acts or defaults which entitled a Roman creditor to
bonorum venditio, may be compared with those which entitle an
English creditor to petition for an adjudication in bankruptcy, i. e.
to the so-called acts of bankruptcy of English jurisprudence.

(1) As manus injectio might be founded on a previous judgment
or an admission of debt (res judicata or aes confessum), and missio
in possessionem might be granted instead of pignoris capio against
judicatus who makes default, so in English law non-payment of an
admitted or a judgment debt after service of a debtor's summons is

 

 

