508 DE AOTIONIBUS. [ιν. ξς 21-25.

right was incontestable and the defendant submitted. We certainly
find manus injectio spoken of by non-juristic writers as an act' of
sslf-redress: e. g.

Injiciam dominas in mea jura manue, Ovid, Am. 2, 4.

Clamarem, Meus est, injiceremque manuS, ovid, Her. 12.

In this case the award of a magistrate (addictio) would not be a
necessary preliminary to abduction (secum duci) : but self-redress
was a remedy only tolerated when society was very loosely consoli-
dated3 and abductio without preceding addictio must at an early '
period have become illegal. The final blow struck by the state at
Self-redress was the constitution of the three emperors, Aa). 389,
p. 466.

(2) Manus injectio ceased to be a mere act of self-redress, and
became the first stage of a statute-process (legis actio) whenever a
Vindex interposed, or, in manus injectio pura, whenever the alleged
debtor became defendant in an action, Iliering, 11, c.

In explaining the nature of Nexum, p. 363, I have assumed with
Savigny‚ that Manus injectio implied a preceding Condictio in
which the debtor became judicatus. 'Phe necessity of this preli-
minary CondictiO, however, is not admitted by Huschke: and
certainly the statutes which introduced Manus injectio pro judi·
cato and Manus injectio pura seem to have intended that Manus
injectio should be the procedure in the first instance without any
antecedent Condictio or Sacramentum.

There are many allusions in history to the private gaols of the
usurers 3 e. g. An placeret, fenore circumventam plebem, potius

· ι ς ,ςᾳιιειω sorte creditum solvat, corpus in nervum ac supplicia dare : et

gregatim quotidie de foro addictos duci, et repleri vinctis nobiles
domm, et ubieunque patricius habitet, ibi carcerem privatum esse
[13.0. 366] , Livy, 6, 36. ‘ Was it well that the commonS, over-
whelmed with usury, instead of paying the capital, should sur-
render their bodies to the stocks and torture3 that herds should
daily be dragged from the forum to servitude 3 that noble houses
should be crowded with men in chains, and every patrician mansion
should be a private prison Ρ ³ Zeno (Ad). 490) calls the detention of
a man in a private prison ‘nefandissimorum hominum arrogantia’
—‘ nefandissimum sceluS,’—-and says that it had long been unlawful.
He makes it high treason, and punishable with death. Governors

of provinces who fail to enforce the law are declared guilty of high
treason, CodeX‚ 9, 5.

 

 

 

