R

0...

172 DE REBUS SINGULIS. Ν [11. ξς 15-27.

alienation were at first, probably, only the ordinary booty of a
predatory tribe, slaves and the larger kinds of cattle3 but aster-
wards included land, rustic servitude& and the familia or univer-
sitas jurum of a testator, 2 ᾧ 103. Not only slaves, but liberae
peran of an inferior domestic statue, filiusfamilias and filiafami-
lias, were subject to conveyance by mancipation. By this process,
a genuine sale for a valuable consideration, a father could sell his
son into domestic bondage (mancipium) ε by this procesS, reduced to
the state of a fiction, a woman became subject to the manus of a
husband (coemptio), and a filiusfamilias was adopted (adoptio) or

· emancipated (emancipatio).

Mancipation, as conveying property without possession, 4 § 131, ·

⁵ may he compared to a Deed in English law3 and, like the cor-
responding English solemnity, might be used as a formality either

of alienation or of contract, 3 ξ 173; or, if we take contract in a
wider. sense as equivalent to bilateral disposition, of contract either
translative or obligative. After the introduction of mancipation
mancipable things were the most easily alienable: they could be
aliened by mancipation as well as by surrender in court and usu—⁸
capion, whereas not-mancipable things were only alienahle by the
two latter modes of transfer. ’

At a later period, however, in order to facilitate the transfer of
property in those cases where it was most difficult, a new and still
simplet process was introduced, namely, tradition or the delivery of
possession. In such not-mancipahle things as were corporeal, the
transfer of possession or physical dominion, that is, the exclusive
power of acting corporeally on a given body, a title in gentile
law, was declared by the legislator to be a title in civil law, to
operate a transfer of legal or civil dominion, dominion ex jure
Quiritium. Thus the tables were now turne'd: thingS, which for-
merly were most difficult, were now most easy to aliene: the term
mancipable, which before denoted an enlargement of the powers of
alienation, now denoted a restriction3 for mancipable things were
things alienable either by surrender or by usucapion or by the
cumbrous process of mancipation, but not by tradition: not-man-
cipable things were things alienable (such of them at least as were
corporeal) either by surrender or by usucapion or by the simple
process of tradition, though not by mancipation.

In respect of land the title in English law corresponding to
tradition is Fcoffment. The essence of a feoffment is livery of

